Three non-collinear points are given in a plane.How many straight lines can be drawn in a plane, which are equidistant from
all three points?

Solution:

Let's first construct a scenario wherein we move from the collinear points to the non collinear points. Take a straight line 
with 3 points on this line. When visualising how many lines are equidistant to these 3 points, we note that the line divides 
the plane into two equal halves and we could have 1 line at a distance d from the existing line L. We could treat the line L 
as a mirror and draw another line at the same distance d but on the opposite side ( treat this as the mirror image of the first
line that you have drawn. You could draw one more line at d' > d and draw its mirror image on the opposite side of L. 
Thus you could continue this process forever and so technically you will have infinite lines in this case when the points 
are collinear. Now we move to the non collinear points scenario. 
Take 2 points as constructing a line and a third point at a distance away so as to form an acute angled triangle.

Draw a perpendicular from the third point to the line you have drawn with the 2 collinear points (this satisfies the non 
collinearity property).Now draw a line parallel to the line which joins the two points and cutting the line joining the 
third point perpendicularly. This new parallel line is equidistant to the two points on a line as well as the third point.
This is for one configuration. Any other configuration will not yield equidistant lines from the three points, so the said line 
has to be in between the 3 points.

We can have 2 more configurations similar to the above where we form the straight line in 2 more ways for the remaining points
and keep the third point in the plane. 
Then in each of these cases, we will be having one line in between that will be equidistant to the isolated point and the 
line by cutting the perpendicular from the point to the line in half.

Thus the total number of such lines is easily seen to be 1 + 1 + 1 = 3

There are 3 such lines which are equidistant from all the three points.

One could wonder will the above argument work only for acute angled triangle configuration?

So in order to extend the argument to obtuse and right angled triangle, we note the following:

Take the 2 points and form a line segment from it. Take another point and place it such a way so that the union of all
3 points will be an obtuse angled triangle. Then draw a line perpendicular (call this the dotted line just for clarity) 
to the extended base of the obtuse triangle. ( Note that in the right angled triangle, this dotted line is actually one of
the arms of the triangle).Now exactly mid way through the dotted line, draw a line L parallel to the base of the obtuse angled
triangle. This line is equidistant from the 3 points for if you were to draw dotted lines from each of the 3 points perpendicular
to this line and measure their lengths, it would be equal. Viewed differently, the same obtuse angled triangle would be an 
acute angled triangle if the base were different and that case, we have considered above. For the other obtuse angled triangle
formed from same triangle, a similar argument would hold and be correct.

For the right angled triangle, the right angle is unique in that only one angle can be a right angle and consider that arm 
which forms this angle with the base. So now, draw a line L parallel to the base of the triangle cutting the arm at the mid point.
It is now evident that since the right angle is just one ( 90 degrees) there is only one line in this case which is equidistant to
all 3 points and that is the line we have drawn.

So, irrespective of the configuration of the points in the plane, we can have a maximum of 3 lines that meet the criteria. We
have exhaustively considered all possible triangles and points and formed our arguments thus.

