Roll The Dice is a gambling game often played at carnivals and gambling houses. A player may bet on any one of the numbers 1,2,3,4,5,6.
Three dice are rolled. If the player's number appears on one , two, or three of the dice, he receives respectively one, two or three
times his original stake plus his own money back; otherwise he loses his stake. What is the player's expected loss per unit stake?
( Actually the player may distribute stakes on several numbers but each stake can be regarded as a separate bet.)

Modified from Mosteller.

Solution :

We consider three cases and compute the losses incurred:
a) When the numbers on the three dice are different
b) When exactly two are alike
c) When all three are different

An easy attack is to suppose that you place a unit stake on each of the six numbers thus betting six units in all. 
Let us suppose the roll produces three different numbers say 1, 2 and 3. Then the house takes 3 unit stakes on the losing 
numbers 4,5,6 and pays off the 3 winning numbers 1,2 and 3. The house did not win anything, you won nothing also.The result 
would be the same if there were 3 different numbers.

Next suppose the roll of the dice results in two of one number and one of a second say 1,1,2. Then the house can use the stakes 
on numbers 3 and 4 to pay off the stake on number 1, and the number on stake 5 to pay off that on number 2. This leaves the stake
on number 6 for the house. Basically the house won 1 unit, you lost 1 unit, so per unit stake you lost 1/6.

Suppose the three dice when rolled , display the same number : 1,1 and 1. Then the house can pay the triple odds from the stakes
placed on 2, 3 and 4 leaving those on 5 and 6 as house winnings.The loss per unit stake then is 2/6. Note that when a roll 
produces a multiple payoff, the players are losing the most on ana average.

To find the expected loss per unit stake in the whole game, we need to weigh the three kinds of outcomes by the probabilities. 
If we regard the three dice as distinguishable say red, green and blue - there are 6 X 6 X 6 = 216 ways for them to fail.

In how many ways do we get three different numbers ? If we take them in order, 6 possibilities for red, then for each of these cases
5 for the green since it must not match the red and for each red green pair, 4 ways for the blue since it must not match the red.
And for each red green pair, 4 ways for the blue since it must match either of the others we get b6 X 5 X 5 = 120.

Lets say for a moment we skip the case where exactly two dice are alike and go on to 3 alike. There are just 6 ways for the red 
to fall and only 1 way for each of the others since they must match the red.

This means that there are 216 - 126 = 90 ways for them to fall two alike and one different. There are 3 main patterns: red-green
alike, red-blue alike, or green-blue alike. Count the number of ways for one of these, red-green alike, red-blue alike, or 
green-blue alike. Count the number of ways for one of these, say red-green alike, and then multiply by 3. The red can be 
thrown in 6 ways, then the green 1 way to match and the blue 5 way to fail to match or 30 ways.All told we then have 3 X 30 = 90
ways which matches with the result we got by subtraction.

We get the expected loss by weighting each loss by its probability and summing as follows:

None        2.               3
alike       alike.          alike
120/216X0 + 90/216 X 1/6  + 6/216 X 2/6 = 17/216 approx 0.079

Thus you lose about 8 % per play. Considering that a play might take half a minute and that government bonds pay you less than 
4 % interest for a year, the attrition is fierce.

This calculation is for regular dice. Sometimes a spinning wheel with a pointer is used with sets of three numbers painted in 
segments around the edge of the wheel.The sets do not correspond perfectly to the frequencies given by the dice. In such 
wheels, it has been observed that multiple payoffs are more frequent than for the dice and therefore the expected loss to the
bettor is greater.

a 
